
<img src="https://www2.mnstate.edu/uploadedImages/Content/Marketing/logos/MSUM_Signature_Vert_Color.jpg" alt="MSUM logo" width="200" style="float:right"/>

# Where are Merlins (Falco columbarius) nesting in Moorhead, and what factors affect their nest site selection?

MaryJo Nelson, Hiba Chaudhry, Sierra Vilmo, Elise Bakke, Dr. Chris
Merkord

Biosciences Department, Minnesota State University Moorhead, 1104 7th
Avenue South, Moorhead, MN 56563 USA

<img src="Images/Covid Female.jpeg" width="335"/>

A female Merlin keeping a watchful eye. The male

is perched a couple meters below her in the same tree.

*Photo: MaryJo Nelson, April 2021*

## Abstract

Merlins (*Falco columbarius*) are a small falcon that have begun
breeding in more urban areas in the Northern Great Plains over the last
forty years, and I am curious about why this is happening. This spring,
I will be conducting two different types of surveys, nest surveys to
determine likely nest sites and playback surveys to determine presence
of Merlins, in order to get an idea of where Merlins are nesting here in
Moorhead, MN. I have two main goals in my analysis of the data I
collect. The first will be to compare the data between the two types of
survey to assess whether the winter nest surveys were useful in
determining where Merlins actually chose to nest. The second will be to
look for patterns in the environmental factors associated with the
Merlin nest sites (i.e. tree type, neighborhood, presence of bird
feeders, presence of open areas, etc.) in order to get an idea of Merlin
preferences when it comes to nest site selection. Information gleaned
from this analysis will guide us in the right direction in how we design
future studies in order to begin answering the question of why Merlins
are nesting in urban areas and what that might mean for the conservation
of Merlins and other species.

## Introduction

Merlins are a small falcon that prey mostly on mid-sized birds, as well
as bats, rodents, and other small mammals. They hunt in open areas but
appear to prefer more tree dense areas for their nest sites, and rather
than build their own nests, they use abandoned nests built by crows and
hawks. Merlins have been known to nest in both conifer and deciduous
trees, as well as on the ground and in cliffs, though in the northern
great plains they appear to have a preference for conifer trees. Many
Merlin nests have been reported in Spruce trees in North Dakota (Konrad
et al. 2020). While breeding season typically runs from March to July,
local lore suggests that breeding Merlins begin to arrive back to the
area as early as February.

Our ultimate goal for this spring is to find as many Merlin nest sites
as possible and to create a database listing their locations as well as
any relevant environmental factors. We expect to find most nest sites in
conifer trees in older neighborhoods, where there is higher tree
density, as well as along the river corridor, but having this concrete
data will give us a better understanding of what Merlins look for in a
nesting site and allow us to better guess where they will choose to nest
in years to come.

## Methods

<img src="Images/Screen Shot 2021-04-18 at 8.05.54 PM.png" width="700"/>

### Survey Area

-   We wanted to focus in on Moorhead since it is smaller and there is
    less ground to cover.

-   In order to make the project manageable in the given time frame, we
    further reduced our survey area.

    -   We used PLSS quarter sections to determine the size and position
        of each quadrant.

    -   We chose 12 quadrants in a checkerboard pattern that would
        encompass the different types of environments in Moorhead
        (e.g. old neighborhoods, shopping centers, new neighborhoods,
        industrial areas).

### Nest Surveys

-   Merlins claim the nests of other birds as opposed to building their
    own

-   Walk or drive every accessible part of each quadrant looking for any
    and all visible nests

-   Use arcGIS to mark locations of all visible nests

### Playback Surveys

<img src="Images/Screen Shot 2021-04-18 at 8.07.04 PM.png" width="700"/>

#### Survey Points:

-   Each quadrant is roughly 800m x 800m

-   Placed survey points 200m apart both east to west and north to south

-   Started in the furthest north west corner of each quadrant and
    placed points moving east, then row by row moving south

-   Each row is offset 50m east of the row directly north

<img src="Images/Screen Shot 2021-04-20 at 5.46.04 AM.png" width="700"/>

<img src="Images/Elise does playback.jpeg" width="500"/>

Elise performs playback with the JBL Clip 4 and the Merlin Bird ID app.

*Photo: MaryJo Nelson, April 2021*

## Progress and Results

![](Images/Screen%20Shot%202021-04-20%20at%205.40.13%20AM.png)

<img src="Images/Screen Shot 2021-04-18 at 8.44.50 PM.png" width="700"/>

<img src="Images/Valley Premiere Female.jpeg" width="350"/>

<img src="Images/Covid Male.jpeg" width="350"/>

A female (left) and a male (right) showing off their different colors.

*Photos: MaryJo Nelson, April 2021*

<img src="Images/11-12 Male.jpeg" width="500"/>

Attempting to capture images of Merlins on a phone and through
binoculars is NOT EASY!

*Photo: Elise Bakke, April 2021*

## What’s Next?

1.  Finish Playback Surveys

    -   We have only completed 5 of the 12 survey quadrants.

    -   We need to survey the remaining quadrants

    -   Time permitting, we may like to survey each quadrant a second
        time at a different time of day from when it was previously
        done.

2.  Nest Visits

    -   Visit all suspected nest trees to confirm presence of Merlin
        pair and nest.

    -   Record pertinent information about nest site and environmental
        factors (e.g. tree species, tree height, nest height, nest
        direction, field nearby, bird feeder presence, etc.)

    -   Periodically visit each confirmed nest tree to monitor Merlin
        behavior and progress/fitness of young (fledglings are expected
        to hatch in June)

3.  Data Analysis

    -   

## References

-   Konrad PM, Shaffer JA, and Igl, LD. 2020. The effects of management
    practices on grassland birds—Merlin (*Falco columbarius*).
    In:Johnson, DH, Igl LD, Shaffer JA, and DeLong, JP, editors. The
    effects of management practices on grassland birds: US Geol Surv
    Prof Pap 1842-R. 12 p. <https://doi.>org/10.3133/pp1842R

-   Merlin. Mnbirdatlas.org. \[accessed 2021 Apr 20\].
    <https://mnbirdatlas.org/species/merlin/>

-   Warkentin IG, Sodhi NS, Espie RHM, Poole AF, Oliphant LW, James PC.
    Merlin (Falco columbarius). Birds of the World. 2020 \[accessed 2021
    Apr 20\].
    <https://birdsoftheworld.org/bow/species/merlin/cur/introduction.>
    <doi:10.2173/bow.merlin.01> 
